Anthony Frank Hawk (born March 15, 1970), nicknamed SkyHawk, is an American professional skateboarder, entrepreneur, and the owner of the skateboard company Birdhouse. A pioneer of modern vertical skateboarding, Hawk completed the first documented "900" skateboarding trick in 1999. He also licensed a skateboarding video game series named after him, published by Electronic Arts that same year. Hawk retired from competing professionally in 2006 and is widely regarded as one of the greatest and most influential skateboarders of all time.
Hawk has been involved in various philanthropic activities throughout his career. He founded The Skatepark Project, which promotes skateboarding as a sport globally.

== Early life ==
Tony Hawk was born on March 15, 1970, in San Diego, California, to Nancy (1926–2020) and Frank Peter Rupert Hawk, and was raised in San Diego. He has two older sisters, Jane and Beth, and an older brother, Mike.
As a child, Hawk was described as "hyperactive." One time, Hawk struck out in baseball and was so distraught that he hid in a warehouse and had to be coaxed out by his father. His parents had him psychologically evaluated at school. The results were that Tony was "gifted," as he was tested with an IQ of 132, so school advisers recommended placing him in advanced classes. Hawk attended Elm Street Middle School from 1982 to 1983. His parents supported his skateboarding because it served as an outlet for his excess energy. Hawk's skills developed, and he made his television debut on a local TV show as "Skateboard Johnny" in 1983. Hawk became a professional skateboarder at age 16. By age 16, he was sponsored by Powell Peralta, Tracker, Sundek, Vans, and SIO. Hawk was the official National Skateboard Association world champion for 10 consecutive years.
Hawk attended three high schools and graduated from Torrey Pines High School in 1986. He listed Steve Caballero and Christian Hosoi as his influences at the time.

== Career ==

=== Skateboarding ===

With the money he made from skateboarding, Hawk bought his first house at age 18 during his senior year in high school.
On July 15, 1999, Hawk became the first skateboarder to land a "900," a trick involving the completion of two-and-a-half mid-air revolutions on a skateboard, in which he was successful on his twelfth attempt. After completing the trick, Hawk said, "This is the best day of my life." He retired from professional competition in 2006, but Hawk continued to appear at the annual X Games until 2004, when he retired from performing. On June 27, 2016, at age 46, Hawk performed what he claimed would be his final 900. In a video posted on the YouTube RIDE Channel, Hawk said, "Spencer was there on my first one, and now he was there on my last," after successfully landing a 900.
Hawk was invited to US president George W. Bush's June 2010 Father's Day celebration and skated in the hallways of the nearby Executive Office Building on the White House grounds. This was the first time anyone had skateboarded on the White House grounds with permission from officials. In 2012, Hawk was inducted into the Skateboarding Hall of Fame.
As of May 2021, Hawk is sponsored by Birdhouse, Vans, Independent, Bones, and Nixon. His current Pro model shoe is the Proto. Hawk was formerly sponsored by Theeve.
In October 2021, Hawk briefly ended his competitive retirement to participate in the Vert Best Trick event at that year's X Games, finishing in fourth place out of nine competitors.

==== Contest victories ====

==== Tricks invented ====

=== Video game series ===

A video game series based on Hawk's skateboarding, titled Tony Hawk's Pro Skater, debuted in 1999. Since then, the series has spawned 18 titles so far, including ten main-series titles, four spin-offs, and four repackages.
Hawk's role in the series was usurped by customizable player characters in later installments, but he has remained a prominent character. In the fifth game in the series, Underground, Hawk is a minor non-player character whom the player meets in Houston, Texas, and skates against. Impressed with the player's skills, Hawk grants them entry into a skate competition. He later appears in Berlin to teach them the "360 Varial Heelflip Lien" move. Hawk and other skaters are briefly playable near the end of the game when they skate in a promotional video for the player's skate team, and in all gameplay modes except the story mode. He appeared as a kid in the Backyard Sports game, Backyard Skateboarding.

=== Film and television ===
In 1988, Hawk was a featured skateboarder and skater-double for Josh Brolin in the movie Gleaming the Cube. In 1988, Hawk made a brief appearance in the movie Police Academy 4: Citizens on Patrol with David Spade. In 1991, Hawk appeared as a skateboarder in Gleaming the Cube. In 2005, he appeared in Neal H. Moritz's and Christopher Gilcrest's film xXx: State of the Union playing the role of one of Xander Cage's stuntman friends. In 2006, Hawk played himself in the Canadian skateboarding movie Deck Dogz. In 2008, he made a cameo appearance in the film Drake & Josh Go Hollywood as himself. Hawk also had a cameo in the movie The New Guy, and appeared in Jackass: The Movie, skateboarding in a fat suit with Mat Hoffman and Bam Margera, as well as in Jackass Number Two skateboarding involving a giant skateboard. Hawk also appeared in the opening title sequences in Jackass 3D and Jackass Forever. He appeared in the film following the 2008 Gumball Rally, 3000 Miles, again with Bam Margera. Hawk also played the police officer who arrests Ryan Dunn in the movie Haggard: The Movie. Hawk made a brief cameo appearance in Lords of Dogtown as an astronaut, where he is shown comically falling off the skateboard as he is a "rookie". Hawk voiced himself in the 2008 animated movie Skateboard Madness, where he is kidnapped by soccer freaks.

Hawk was featured as an extra in the "Weird Al" Yankovic video "Smells Like Nirvana". He can be seen sitting in the bleachers during the crowd sweep near Dick Van Patten. Hawk also made a cameo appearance in the Simple Plan music video for "I'm Just a Kid", he can be seen, in a crowd, at a high school, watching kids skating.
On television, Hawk was a guest on the Nickelodeon kid's show Yo Gabba Gabba!. In 2000, he played himself in Max Steel. Hawk also guest voiced on The Simpsons episode "Barting Over", where he played himself, along with fellow San Diego natives Blink-182. In the episode, Hawk lends Homer a new board from his brand where complete rookies are able to perform at the top levels. Hawk ends up having a comical play off with him after Homer begins to show him up. Tony Hawk appeared as himself in MXC in a special "MXC Almost Live" episode in 2004. On the PBS Kids show Cyberchase, Hawk guest-starred as Slider's long-lost father Coop. In the CSI: Miami episode "Game Over," he played a game programmer who was murdered. Hawk also played on Fox's Are You Smarter Than a 5th Grader?. Hawk hosted Cartoon Network's "Hall of Game" sports award show on February 25, 2012. Hawk was on Take Two With Phineas and Ferb. Hawk appeared on the internet cooking show Epic Meal Time on November 15, 2012, to celebrate the show's one-year anniversary, where he can be seen in the final scene eating a deep-fried pizza cake. Hawk reappeared on another Epic Meal Time video on August 10, 2014, as a guest on the educational cooking show Handle It. Hawk assisted Harley Morenstein (Sauce Boss) in cooking egg rolls. The video features promotion for Hawk's own YouTube channel, RIDE Channel. He also guest-starred on the ABC comedy Last Man Standing. He voiced a mentor character in the episode of "Rocket Power.".
Hawk appeared in the TV series Breaking In, The High Fructose Adventures of Annoying Orange, The Cleveland Show, Sesame Street, and So Random!. Hawk appeared in the movie Parental Guidance as himself. In 2014, he and Eric Koston appeared as reporters in an episode of The Aquabats! Super Show!.