Traditionalism
Traditionalism asserts that ancient wisdom holds universal truths that are relevant across all ages, which comprises primordial and universal truths shared by all major world religions. Scholar John Anderson identified René Guénon, Ananda Coomaraswamy, Julius Evola, Mircea Eliade, Frithjof Schuon, Seyyed Hossein Nasr, and Alexandr Dugin as seven of the most prominent Traditionalists.

Concept
According to the proponents of the Traditionalist School, also known as the Eternalist School, all major world religions are founded upon common primordial and universal metaphysical truths. The perspective espoused by its authors is often referred to as philosophia eterna (timeless philosophy), which is both "absolute Truth and infinite Presence." Absolute Truth is "the fundamental wisdom that underpins all genuine spiritual traditions." Infinite Presence is "the underlying spiritual essence that is common to all authentic religious traditions." According to Frithjof Schuon,

The term philosophia eterna, which has been in use since the time of the Enlightenment and has been widely adopted by neo-scholasticism, signifies the complete body of primordial and universal truths—and thus the metaphysical axioms—whose formulation does not belong to any particular system. One could similarly speak of a religio perennis, designating by this term the essence of every religion; this translates to the enduring essence of all spiritual practices and moral systems, just as the sophia perennis is the essence of all dogmas and all expressions of wisdom. We prefer the term sophia to philosophia because the latter is less direct and evokes associations of ideas with often profane and errant systems of thought.

The Traditionalist vision of a perennial wisdom is not based on mystical experiences but on metaphysical intuitions. It is "intuited directly through divine intellect." This divine intellect transcends reason by perceiving the sacred unity inherent in all true esoteric traditions and enables one to discern "the sacred unity of reality that is attested in all authentic esoteric expressions of tradition"; it is "the presence of divinity within each human waiting to be uncovered." According to Schuon:

The key to the eternal sophia is profound spiritual insight or metaphysical understanding. To "discern" means to distinguish the true from the false, the eternal from the temporal, and the spiritual self from the material illusion. Accompanying discernment, as a complement and operatively, is meditation, which unites: this means becoming fully aware—from the starting point of earthly and human Maya—of Atma, which is both absolute and infinite.

For Traditionalists, perennial philosophy has a transcendent dimension—Truth or Wisdom—and an immanent dimension—infinite Presence or Union. Thus, on one hand, "discernment between the Real and the unreal, or the Absolute and the relative," and on the other hand, "mystical concentration on the Real."

According to Traditionalists, this perennial truth has been obscured by the emergence of contemporary secular ideologies post-Enlightenment, and modernism itself is considered a deviation from authentic spiritual values. Traditionalists view their approach as a justifiable longing for the past; in Schuon's words: "If recognizing what is true and just is 'nostalgia for the past,' it is clearly a crime or a disgrace not to feel this nostalgia."

Traditionalists insist on the necessity of affiliation with one of the great world religions, without which no esoteric path is possible.

People
The ideas of the Traditionalist School are considered to begin with Ananda Coomaraswamy. Other members of this school of thought include Ananda Coomaraswamy, Frithjof Schuon, Titus Burckhardt, Martin Lings, Hossein Nasr, William Stoddart, Jean-Louis Michon, Marco Pallis, Lord Northbourne, Huston Smith, Awadh Kishore Saran, Harry Oldmeadow, Reza Shah-Kazemi, and Patrick Laude. Some academics include Julius Evola in this school, although Evola presents many differences from the aforementioned thinkers. Another author occasionally linked to perennialism is Mircea Eliade, although Eliade's connection is nuanced and often contested.

René Guénon
A major theme in René Guénon's work (1886–1951) is the contrast between traditional worldviews and modernism, "which he considered to be a historical aberration." For Guénon, the world is a manifestation of metaphysical principles, which are preserved in the perennial teachings of world religions but were lost to the modern world. For Guénon, "the malaise of the modern world lies in its relentless denial of the metaphysical realm."

Early on, Guénon was attracted to Hinduism, and in 1912 he was initiated into the Shadhili order. He began writing after his doctoral dissertation was rejected, and he left academia in 1923. His works focus on the return to traditional worldviews, aiming to reconstruct the Perennial Philosophy.

In his early books and essays, he envisioned the restoration of traditional "intellectuality" in the West based on Roman Catholicism and Freemasonry. He abandoned the idea of a purely Christian basis for the West's traditionalist restoration and searched for other traditions. He denounced the lure of Theosophy and neo-occultism in the form of Spiritism, two influential movements flourishing during his lifetime. In 1930, he moved to India, where he lived until his death in 1951.

Influence
In the East
Through its close affiliation with Sufism, the Guénonian traditionalist perspective has been gaining ground in Asia and within the broader Islamic world.

Iran
In Iran, it was introduced by Seyyed Hossein Nasr and, earlier, by Ali Shariati, an intellectual considered the ideologue of the Iranian Revolution who recommended Guénon to his students. While it never acquired a mass following, its influence on the elite is evident since when Ayatollah Khomeini organized the Supreme Council of the Cultural Revolution, three of its seven members—Abdolkarim Soroush, Reza Davari Ardakani, and Nasrullah Pourjavady—were acquainted with Traditionalist ideas.

Pakistan
Hasan Askari, an important writer and literary critic, was directly influenced by Guénon, and through him, Muhammad Shafi Deobandi and his son Muhammad Taqi Usmani, some of Pakistan's most influential Islamic scholars, integrated Guénon's works into the curriculum of the Darul Uloom Karachi, a major religious seminary in the country. Other notable Pakistani figures influenced by Traditionalism include A. K. Brohi, an associate of General Zia-ul-Haq, and psychologist Muhammad Ajmal.

Morocco
The Darqawi order of Sufism, based in Morocco, is known to incorporate strands influenced by Traditionalism.

In the West
United Kingdom
According to Mark Sedgwick, King Charles III, then Prince of Wales, was "more of an advocate for traditional values than a strict Traditionalist, though [...] Traditionalist influences [were] increasingly visible in some of his speeches."

Far-right movements
Julius Evola was an Italian Traditionalist influenced by Guénon but who diverged on many points, hence not being fully assimilated into the Guénonian Traditionalist School. Evola's ideas have been linked to some far-right movements, such as the European Nouvelle Droite ("New Right") and Italian Fascists during the Years of Lead. Similarly, the Romanian traditionalist Mircea Eliade had been a supporter of the Romanian Orthodox fascist Iron Guard. According to Benjamin Teitelbaum, Savitri Devi, the founder of Esoteric Hitlerism, was influenced by both Guénon and Evola.